–:–:–:–

🚨 Flash Sale 🚨 Get $100 off your Disrupt 2026 ticket

Back by popular demand: Save up to $300 on Disrupt

Close

TechCrunch Desktop Logo

TechCrunch Mobile Logo

Latest

Startups

Venture

Apple

Security

AI

Apps

Disrupt 2026

Events

Podcasts

Newsletters

Search
Submit

Site Search Toggle

Mega Menu Toggle

Topics

Latest

AI

Amazon

Apps

Biotech & Health

Climate

Cloud Computing

Commerce

Crypto

Enterprise

EVs

Fintech

Fundraising

Gadgets

Gaming

Google

Government & Policy

Hardware

Instagram

Layoffs

Media & Entertainment

Meta

Microsoft

Privacy

Robotics

Security

Social

Space

Startups

TikTok

Transportation

Venture

More from TechCrunch

Staff

Events

Startup Battlefield

StrictlyVC

Newsletters

Podcasts

Videos

Partner Content

TechCrunch Brand Studio

Contact Us

Image Credits:Matthias Oesterle/Corbis / Getty Images

AI

Stripe didn’t really buy OpenRouter because of the ‘singularity’

Julie Bort

4:32 PM PDT · August 19, 2026

Stripe confirmed on Wednesday that it was buying OpenRouter. While the company didn’t disclose the deal price, sources told the New York Times that it paid $7.5 billion.

That’s a huge step up from OpenRouter’s $1.3 billion valuation in May. To put that price into context, the founders alone will reportedly receive $1.5 billion from the sale — more than the startup’s entire valuation just three months ago. Investors will get the remaining $6 billion, according to the NYT. Stripe reportedly had to outbid others interested in the fast-growing startup, including Databricks.

But the question is: What does a payments giant want with a startup that routes prompts between different AI models?

The short and funny answer, according to a leaked letter from Stripe’s founders to its investors about the deal, is this: the singularity.

“It’s a fuzzy and perhaps already overworked term but we decided that January 1 marked the beginning of the singularity and we’ve been operating on that basis,” they wrote in the letter, published by Eric Newcomer and verified by TechCrunch.

The singularity is supposed to mean the point at which humans and the tech we’ve created merge to become a new species. This is obviously a tongue-in-cheek reference (as Patrick Collison admitted when using the term at his company’s conference in April). We’re fairly certain Stripe’s founders, the brothers Patrick and John Collison, don’t think humanity started turning into The Borg eight months ago.

But they have referred to the economic uptick that AI is bringing to Stripe. With AI, more companies are being launched and more of them are using Stripe’s offerings. Stripe says that 88% of the Forbes AI 50 are using its products, including OpenAI and Anthropic, as do 100% of Brex’s fastest-growing startups. No one knows how AI and agents will change the economy of the future, but everyone is certain it will change it dramatically.

That still doesn’t explain why Stripe wants a company mostly known for helping developers manage their model usage. Stripe’s founders acknowledged that their customer bases overlap.

“OpenRouter is exceptionally useful for any developer and Stripe is one of the world’s largest developer platforms,” the founders write in their letter. No doubt that just using OpenRouter internally will probably offer significant benefits to Stripe and make it easier to roll out future model-agnostic agentic offerings, too.

It seems as if OpenRouter will continue to operate independently after the deal closes in a few weeks, or so the startup promised in its own blog post, saying that its “product, mission, and current commitments remain unchanged.”

Still, until now, most of Stripe’s large acquisitions have been related to helping people collect and manage incoming cash. Buying OpenRouter looks like a move to the other side of the ledger, too: expense management, beginning with AI expenses.

This acquisition “is Stripe’s deliberate attempt to embed itself into the middle of capital flows in the AI era,” said PitchBook’s research analyst Franco Granda.

It’s joining an unusual assortment of companies also entering token expense management. Databricks developed its own AI gateway. Rippling just launched one focused on employee AI spend and ROI. Ramp just launched one, also for AI expense management. And the list goes on.

For Stripe, buying the granddaddy of popular AI gateways for developers gives it insight into how coders are using AI. But it also gains a lever on AI demand itself. OpenRouter will grant it “some degree of power over suppliers such as the frontier labs themselves, as well as hyperscalers and neoclouds,” Granda said.

It may not be the Borg, but payments plus token expense management and a model router? That’s a lot of power.

Topics

AI, openrouter, stripe

When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

Julie Bort

Venture Editor

Julie Bort is the Startups/Venture Desk editor for TechCrunch.

You can contact or verify outreach from Julie by emailing julie.bort@techcrunch.com or via @Julie188 on X.

View Bio

October 13 – 15

San Francisco

Don’t miss out. The startup community will gather to answer a pivotal question: How do you build sustainably in the AI era?

REGISTER NOW

Most Popular

Two years after launch, Walmart’s Flipkart is closing in on India’s quick-commerce leaders

Jagmeet Singh

Inherent, founded by DeepMind alumni, says its AI ‘teammate’ just outperformed Anthropic and OpenAI at replicating research

Anna Heim

Michael Polansky is training an AI model on skin that’s still alive

Connie Loizos

How AI accounting startup Rillet raised $100M and became a unicorn in 48 hours

Dominic-Madori Davis

Nvidia just showed that the harness, not the AI model, is now the real hero

Julie Bort

Tesla’s solar roof is dead — here’s what went wrong

Tim De Chant

Oura faces lawsuit accusing it of misleading consumers about sleep-tracking accuracy

Aisha Malik

Loading the next article

Error loading the next article

X

LinkedIn

Facebook

Instagram

youTube

Mastodon

Threads

Bluesky

TechCrunch

Staff

Contact Us

Advertise

Site Map

Terms of Service

Privacy Policy

RSS Terms of Use

Code of Conduct

OpenAI

Hugging Face

Flock

Startup Battlefield

Disrupt 2026

Tech Layoffs

ChatGPT

© 2026 TechCrunch Media LLC.