Jump to main content

Search

TOPICS

Security

All Security

Cyber-crime

Patches

Research

CSO

Off-Prem

All Off-Prem

Edge and IoT

Channel

PaaS and IaaS

SaaS

On-Prem

All On-Prem

Systems

Storage

Networks

HPC

Personal Tech

Cx0

Public Sector

Software

All Software

AI and ML

Applications

Databases

DevOps

OS Platforms

Virtualization

Offbeat

All Offbeat

Columnists

Science

BOFH

Legal

Site News

About Us

Special Features

All Special Features

Cloud Infrastructure Month 2026

HPE: AI Explainers

Agentic AI

The Future of the Datacenter

AWS:Reinvent

Nvidia GTC

Supercomputing Month

Computex 2026

AI Infrastructure Month 2026

The State of Storage 2026

RSA Conference

Vendor Voice

All Vendor Voice

Modernizing Financial Services with FIS and AWS

Barco

Infinidat

Everpure

Rubrik

Make it real with Capgemini and AWS

Money Movement Hub

ZTE

Nutanix: Scale Kubernetes. Not Chaos.

AWS New Horizon

Digicert

Netscout

Resources

Intelligence

Webinars & Events

Newsletters

Search

Sign in

AI

Security

AWS

Microsoft

Developer

Open Source

BOFH

Who, Me?

On Call

Podcasts

REG AD

AI + ML

The big AI companies are going to see their margins disappear

AI will indeed eat the world – if your world involves software-size margins

Thomas Claburn

Thomas
Claburn

Published
mon 18 May 2026 // 23:33 UTC

OPINION The future of AI is unwritten, but the writing is on the wall – your margin is my opportunity.

Amazon founder Jeff Bezos said as much more than a decade ago in support of the e-souk's low-price, low-margin sales strategy.

That opportunity exists in the AI training and inference business. But perhaps not for long.

REG AD

Two leading American AI companies, Anthropic and OpenAI, are not actually profitable at this point, but their pitch to investors is something along the lines of "just hang in there a few more years and keep sending cash."

REG AD

MORE CONTEXT

Uncle Sam's next big supercomputer might use something more exotic than GPUs

Yes, you can serve a website from a $1 microcontroller

Linux kernel flaw opens root-only files to unprivileged users

Europe tests laser links as satellite comms outgrow radio

Given reports that Claude Code subscribers paying $200 a month can potentially consume $5,000 worth of tokens and that OpenAI is also losing money on subscriptions, it starts to become a bit clear why Anthropic, OpenAI, Google, and Microsoft have already started pushing customers toward metered usage pricing. AI revenue needs to go up for frontier model makers to survive. And then AI adoption needs to grow.

Government agencies and large corporations that don't keep a close eye on fees may be terrified enough of AI-enabled exploitation to pay a premium for models like Anthropic's Mythos and OpenAI's GPT-5.5.

But more price-sensitive folk may shop for cheaper tokens. And they're likely to find them.

Benedict Evans, among the more astute industry observers, expects AI models will be commoditized. In his recently updated presentation, "AI eats the world," he suggests that the AI supply/demand imbalance will ease and the pricing power of leading AI labs will dissipate.

He argues that models will become commodity infrastructure and that innovation and pricing power will have to move up the stack.

That's already evident in Anthropic's efforts to keep developers interacting through its own tools like the Claude Code CLI and desktop app, and through services that sit atop its models like Claude Cowork, Claude Design, and Claude for Creative Work.

But it's more apparent in US companies lobbying for regulatory intervention as a defense against competition from China, some of which has taken the form of copying AI models via a process called distillation.

Zilan Qian, a research associate at the Oxford China Policy Lab, recently explored how software developers in China are acquiring AI tokens for pennies on the dollar. She writes that despite the fact that leading US model makers try to prevent people in China from using US models, everyone who wants access can get it through API proxies.

REG AD

"The logs they generate may have become a commodity, traded for purposes ranging from model training to targeted fraud," Qian wrote. "Meanwhile, every layer of control frontier US AI companies have added (geoblocking, phone verification, credit card requirements, and now live biometric KYC checks) has produced a corresponding layer of evasion infrastructure."

This process may not be savory or sustainable – Qian posits these token sellers are just trying to acquire customers and obtain data – but it points to the difficulty US firms will have maintaining their margins and their exclusivity.

Open weight models like GLM-5.1, Kimi K2.6, DeepSeek V4-Pro, and Qwen3-Coder-Next are already adequate for less demanding software development work and some, like Qwen3.6-27B, run quite well on suitably provisioned local hardware.

US companies are estimated to have a lead of about seven months on Chinese AI companies. But that race will not go on forever. Even if US AI models continue to improve at their current pace, open weight models from China and elsewhere should match current leaders Claude Opus 4.7 and OpenAI GPT-5.5 by the end of 2026.

At that point, better benchmarks will no doubt be welcomed, but they won't be necessary. Commodity AI will be good enough for enterprise and entrepreneurial software development. And maybe other uses will emerge, but coding right now is what people are paying for.

As noted by Andreessen Horowitz, annualized AI spending by enterprises reached $3 billion annually for coding. In other categories (legal $500 million, support $400M, and medical/health $300M), adoption is significantly less.

Looking at Evans's "AI eats the world" figures, promoting AI adoption will be a challenge. The tech industry is the only US workplace sector where more than 25 percent use AI on a daily basis. In finance, professional services, healthcare, retail, manufacturing, and government, there's less daily usage. And in the consumer space, only five percent of ChatGPT’s 900 million-plus weekly users pay for the privilege.

Among software developers, most of those using AI are not trying to apply it to cutting-edge research or to develop complex attack chains. They're using it for fairly well understood software applications and workflows, or they're experimenting with AI agents. And increasingly, it looks like they can buy tokens at a discount if that matters.

REG AD

Anthropic and OpenAI need pricing and adoption to go up in order to thrive. Their margin is their vulnerability. They're going to strike deals with incumbents to make their models available on desktop and mobile hardware, particularly given the space and power constraints of phones. That will come at a cost.

The likely winners will be the companies that control software distribution and delivery – operating system vendors like Apple, Google, and Microsoft, and cloud service providers like Amazon, Google, and Microsoft.

Absent regulatory or legal barriers, supply constraints, or practical obstacles, prices face downward pressure where margins are high. And when you're many billions in the hole like Anthropic and OpenAI, that makes escape more difficult.

In his presentation, Evans observes, "Sometimes software eats the world, and sometimes it only nibbles."  ®

commoditization
artificial intelligence
anthropic
ai + ml
ai
software development
opinion
openai

REG AD

OFFBEAT

SpaceX plans to plant $100B Starbase on Louisiana coast

Plans to break ground in 2027, produce own propellent, power in 'self-sustaining' spaceport. All before Starship ships v1.0 orbit

OFFBEAT

UK supermarket scales go 404 on shoppers

Tesco produce not found? But beware the forbidden scales...

devops

Platform Engineering 2.0: your platform was built for a different era. AI just exposed it

PARTNER CONTENT: Platform engineering won the argument. Now it has to grow up fast and evolve for the AI era.

AI and ML

Debian polls its developers on whether to burn the bots, tame the bots, or let 'em loose

Eight-way ballot on AI code puts the distro's fractious democracy through its paces

columnists

Software should work, and talking about it needn't be boring

Bingeing the boxed set of binary bafflement

public sector

Sopra Steria's £370M Capita spat heads for 2028 courtroom showdown

French SI still crying foul over shared services contract, alleges bid was 42% under DWP's own cost model

TOP STORIES

SAAS

Salesforce partners not seeing meaningful revenue from Agentforce AI platform, report says

security

Security vets rally around $4 paper password books for sale in Australia

SAAS

GitHub blames 8-hour outage on autoscaling fail and VS Code retry storm

security

Expired credit cards revived by researchers to make unauthorized payments

ofbeat

NASA estimates the size of the hole SpaceX made in the moon

virtualization

Microsoft ends one of the last ways to buy VMware without big bundles

AI

AI and ML

Debian polls its developers on whether to burn the bots, tame the bots, or let 'em loose

Eight-way ballot on AI code puts the distro's fractious democracy through its paces

ON-PREM

EPA to drop requirement for public notice of polluting datacenters

State and local regulators would decide whether the public gets a say on minor-source permits

SYSTEMS

OpenAI's upcoming Jalapeño chip looks like it'll be an inference beast

128 chips, 1.7 exaFLOPS, and 27 TB of HBM give Altman and crew a leg up over Blackwell, and maybe even Rubin

SYSTEMS

What Nvidia's first Groq 3 LPU benchmarks tell us about its $20B gamble

Gemma 4 31B performance tests offer a best-case scenario for next-gen dataflow accelerators

ON-PREM

US datacenters tripled their water footprint in 10 years

... and those are figures from the start of the AI boom. It can only be worse now. Silo-ed reporting isn't helping

Infosec

Security

Russians are posing as Signal support to launch phishing attacks

PLUS: US takes down Iranian propaganda sites; Marketing company asks 'Why Do We Have Your Information?' And more!

Security

Microsoft patches failed to fix on-prem SharePoint, which is now under zero-day attack

PLUS: China upgrades smartphone surveillance tools; Ring eases anti-snooping stance; and more

Black Hat and DEF CON

DEF CON Franklin project enlists hackers to harden critical infrastructure

Voting village reports have been so successful, says Jeff Moss, that the whole of DEF CON will now be included

Security

EQT buys majority share in Swiss cybersecurity biz Acronis

Went at equivalent of $3.5B+ valuation for entire firm, though portion sold not specified

Malware Month

Ten years since the first corp ransomware, Mikko Hyppönen sees no end in sight

On the plus side, infosec's a good bet for a long, stable career

FOSS

Emperor Penguin Linus Torvalds banishes a bug – with a bot

The lad himself finds and fixes a tricky one… or does he?

FOSS smashed one Microsoft monopoly. After 20 years of failure, it's time to smash another

Word up

GNOME can look like Windows – and Flashback can do it without extensions

New 'Simple-taskbar' is an option, but there's a simpler, stabler way

A moment of silence, please, for the final release of Debian on x86-32

New Debian versions hit FOSSland in the form of 13.6 and 12.15

Baddies caught exploiting extensions bugs with perfect 10 scores on vulnerable Joomla websites

Flaws in iCagenda, Balbooa Forms extensions can impact open source CMS that powers a million sites worldwide

Frame: A new X11 server – implemented directly in assembly

Joins yserver, Phoenix, and of course XLibre – and outlier Arcan

Biting the hand that feeds IT

About Us

Contact us
Advertise with us
Who we are
Newsletter

Our Websites

The Next Platform
DevClass
Blocks and Files
Situation Publishing

Your Privacy

Cookies Policy
Privacy Policy
Ts & Cs
Do not share my personal information
Your Consent Options

Archives

27 years of articles

Copyright. All rights reserved © 1998-2026.